---
title: Discovering SQL - The Language of Data
image: /assets/images/post_sql/title.png
---

## Introduction

In the vast landscape of programming languages, SQL stands out as a specialized tool designed for one crucial task: managing data. Unlike versatile languages like Python or Java, SQL is tailored specifically for working with databases, offering a unique approach to data manipulation.

What sets SQL apart from other languages is its simplicity and focus. While traditional programming languages require step-by-step instructions, SQL lets users describe what they want to achieve without worrying about the technical details. This declarative style makes it intuitive and efficient for tasks like querying, updating, and deleting data.

Moreover, SQL operates at a higher level of abstraction, allowing users to express complex operations concisely. Its widespread use across industries underscores its importance in today's data-driven world, making it a valuable skill for professionals across various domains.

Despite being a relatively intuitive language, many struggle to get the grasp of SQL. And from my experience of teaching, I see people understand SQL (or anything in a broader sense) when they can relate SQL to their lives. In this post, I will do just that.


## How to think of SQL?

Before thinking of SQL, let's introduce you to the world and set the stage for learning SQL. You are a very rich person with a personal assistant from Saturn. You have a passion for collecting books of all sorts and made quite a big library over the years. Your assistant manages the library for you. You just tell him what to do, and he gets it done. The only problem is the language barrier. Your assistant only understands a few words, and you have to use only those words to make him do something properly. Well, you can do this much to keep a Saturnian assistant, right?

To easily remember the words that your assistant understands, you made a diary named "Saturnian Query Language" and stored the few words that the Saturnian understands. Throughout the post, we will use your diary to understand how you interact successfully with your assistant.

## Simple to complex

